---
layout: post
categories: [captains-log]
title: "Captain's Log. Week 5 -- Game Design is Hard. Let's go shopping!"
---

I skipped a week!

What happened was that I shipped a game. Then I spent a lot of time obsessing about it.

I have done some, but not much, coding progress since the last Captain's Log. I moved a lot of code around, mostly from GLSL to C, starting to design an actual system instead of a tech demo. Implementing Bounding Volume Heirarchies on the CPU side is done, but I need to do the GPU side.

I may not have much to report on the coding side, but I have done a lot of progress inside my mind-brains. The thing is, doing a 3D game as a one-man-army is hard. I had to face this and reconsider a lot of decisions that I thought were set in stone.

I wanted to make a game about stretching and warping space. I really wanted to walk inside a virtual TARDIS, and for a long while I tried to duck tape a game design around that idea.

One of the best advice on creativity that I have been given is that creative ideas often come from limitations. In other words, creative ideas are often just solutions to (possibly arbitrary) restrictions.

The possibility of a space that can be stretched and cut and bent is interesting, but it is not a restriction. Since I decided to make a complicated 3D game, every restriction that I set when thinking of game ideas was set with the intention of making the project feasible, not more creatively interesting.

I was also making another creativity-killing mistake: taking the project too seriously. I set out to do this because I believed (and still do) that making a contribution to gaming is the thing that I want to do with my life; for now, anyway. While I like thinking that, it unintentionally made the project more serious. While drawing or taking notes, I was judging ideas based on how meaningful they were. I wasn't having fun.

So I sat down and thought about the games I like. I like games that make me solve puzzles and I also love the thrill of stealth games, good stealth is both action and puzzle. I don't think games should be linear; one of the defining qualities of games versus other media is that games are interactive, they can be made so that every choice changes every next choice. This is the most powerful aspect of games, we should embrace it. Cutscenes are an insult to gaming.

The thought of creating a non-linear stealth platformer filled me with excitement.

I want to keep it non linear by not enforcing a particular order for completion. I'm pretty sure that making the levels procedural would result in a lot of complicated code, bugs, and levels not near as good as what could be possible by just doing them by hand.

I am not sure if the platformer genre can shift to VR, but my gut says "yes!".

I'm keeping my current progress. I am certain that a minimalistic style will work great, so I won't abandon ray tracing unless I'm forced to; it's just so much more comfortable and fun than writing a traditional renderer. My target is something with Steam-machine specs, on a machine like that, a renderer that is 100x slower than what I could do with rasterization can still draw anything I can produce without any trouble. Hopefully I will come closer to 10x, 100x seems excessive :) Also, for a stealth game, ray-traced shadows are going to be life-saving. Worst-case-scenario, I have to write a traditional renderer. For a game of this scope, it's not that bad.

So, as of today, my plan is to do Mark of the Ninja meets Braid meets Earthworm Jim, in VR. Every game idea that comes from me or from someone else is a linear combination of existing games. We'll see how the idea evolves and how the actual game finds its voice.

