---
layout: post
categories: [captains-log]
title: "Captain's Log. Week 9 and 10 -- ASO and Project Chicken"
---

This time I am reporting two weeks of work because there hasn't been a lot of work being done.

I failed to save my Linux hard drive. It wasn't a serious problem apart from the fact that my local repository for [Klay](/klay) has more than a couple of commits that I hadn't pushed. Oh well...

Klay is not doing too well. Profits went from "pizza money" to "no money" so I decided to do some "App Store Optimization", or ASO. I spent some time selecting new keywords; they're the only thing a developer can control that helps boost App Store search results.

After 8 days, Apple updated my app with my new keywords. I waited for a number of days and there was not a single sale.

It was clear thet I needed to change route and build a new, free, version of Klay with only one background and a big button that reads "Unlock all backgrounds for only $0.99!", or something. More in-app-purchases are possible but first I want to see if this works.

I made Klay free for the weekend and saw a spike of downloads, averaging 20 a day. With absolutely no PR or any other change other than making it free, I got a decent boost (by my standards). A freemium version makes sense.

## And now to the thing that I actually want to be doing:

I did some refactoring and set up a new project, codenamed "Project Chicken". I need to get started prototyping, so I coded a small level loader.

Levels are JSON text files. I feel like I am going to hell for being so wasteful, but I recently got bitten in the ass for using a binary format for Klay, and there is no pressure to be fast (yet). JSON makes sense. Binary still makes sense for Klay because sculptures need to be loaded really, really fast there.

At least it's not XML, seppuku is the penance for using that.

It has been fun to do platformer controls, and so far it feels like the rift gives something extra to the 2.5D platformer.

I put some effort into figuring out latency issues. The test cases run smooth as butter now, but only with the Rift set as an external monitor. "Direct mode" famously has prolems with OpenGL so I am avoiding that until other people step on all the mines and Oculus releases a new devkit.

Also, there is a small problem with the ray tracer. Overlapping primitives result in z-order artifacts. The reason is a early-reject optimization in my BVH traversal routine.

You know it has been going slow when I am writing bug reports in the Captain's Log.

Final note: Not satisfied with the speed of progress, but there has been a lot of personal stuff in the way. Nothing serious, just life. It's not necessarily bad, but I need to keep a good pace. The biggest stength of a one man army is speed!

Windows has been really nice to work on. I miss all the Unix goodness, but Windows has a lot of advantages over Linux, both for the developer and the desktop user.

Will report next week, hopefully with a ton of progress!
