---
layout: post
categories: [ramblings]
title: "Just Ship It (Value and Evil)"
---

When I login to "iTunes Connect" I see two things: a "Ready for Sale" text and a little green light right next to it. Those things are letting me know that there is nothing between [Klay](/klay) and the market, other than me.

Getting my app approved made me grind to a halt. For almost a month I have been happily making progress on my new, exciting, and completely unrelated project. My original plan was to do some PR and ship my iPad app before getting to work on the new thing, but this is not what has happened.

Before now, I believed that I was procrastinating; I have been binge-watching Doctor Who episodes instead of working towards shipping. Just now, I have realized that in reality I am simply paralyzed with fear.

There is a whole universe out there if you go out looking up how to make money on the app store. One would think that it is as simple as sticking an app in one side and then seeing money come out of the other end, but the Internet says otherwise.

Spend one second looking for marketing tips and you will find out about all the hype that you should have created long ago, too late now, you idiot; the importance of choosing the right search keywords, and all the affordable and convenient products that can help you choose them; the absolute necessity of having strong reviews come out at exactly the same time as the release of your app. There are countless bits of marketing and PR that you have to get right if you want to survive for even an instant in the ocean that is the Apple App Store.

At least that is how my mind was seeing things, I think I have a clearer picture now.

Visualize two orthogonal axes: One representing Value, and the other representing Evil.

"Value" represents how much value you give to the world. If you solve a problem that a lot of people were having then you have extremely high value. If you are a game, value represents whatever subjective values each of us thinks makes a game "good". I think we can all agree that "Candy Crush" is shit, so I will pick that game as "Low Value".

"Evil" is how many tactics you use to get your product noticed by other humans. All products are a little bit evil, I don't know of any product that isn't evil because if I know about a it, by definition there was effort and intent placed to make me know about it. I chose a strong word because marketing tactics tend towards the manipulative and dishonest, but I am not against marketing, promotion or PR; I think it's necessary.

This gives us four categories: High-value low-evil, high-value high-evil, low-value high-evil, and low-value low-evil.

A couple of examples of different games and where they would fall on the spectrum:

Anything by [the dude who created crayon physics](http://www.kloonigames.com/blog/) or [Terry Cavanagh](http://distractionware.com/blog/) is high-value low-evil. They make excellent games, and although they do promotion, they don't do a lot of it.

Bioshock is high-value high-evil. BioShock is a great game, and there was a lot of marketing involved to get it to sell many, many copies.

Low-value-low-evil is the shitty Tetris clone that I made for my feature phone that only two people ever played. Thankfully, it was lost in time.

There is nothing wrong with any of the above. But the next one...

Low-value. High-evil:

Here is where you find everything made by Zynga; every game that gets you hooked and then tries to milk from you as much money as it can. They would be better classified as psychological scams rather than games.

I believe that I have created [something of value](/klay), and this is the advice I am giving to myself and any person who is reading who might be in a situation similar to mine:

If you made a quality app, ship it.

If you have created something of value, ship it.

You can go as far as you want on the "Evil" axis. Get some reviews. Go on forums and show it to people. Go as Evil as you want, just get the Value out into the world, it really could use more of it.

The action I am taking to follow my own advice is to ship this Thursday, July 17. I will get evil after that. I will contact journalists to get reviews if I can. I am even being Evil now: I am posting this on reddit to get some exposure.

*Footnote:
Evil does not necessarily mean "Profitable". As a proof of existence: anything by Terry Cavanagh scores pretty low on Evil but is hugely profitable and full of Value.*

Addendum (January 2014)
-----------------------

I shipped my game and it flopped. Turns out the internet was right, I should have put way more Evil way earlier into the project. I have no regrets though, I learned a whole bunch through every stage of the project, after sales dropped to one per week, I decided to make it free.

*(I did some editing. Mostly style and readability but I did remove a vitriolic comment that I was not proud of making)*
