---
layout: post
categories: [captains-log]
title: "Captain's Log. Week 1 -- Game Design"
---

[Klay](/klay) is officially finished and its iTunes Connect status is "In Review"; I hope everything goes OK but the app is out of my hands for now.

In order to force myself to push through and ship, for the past two months or so I sent weekly progress emails to my proxy boss (dad), it was helpful. I am going to continue this weekly tradition by posting here.

Since this is the first log of the new project, this week's episode won't be a recount of last week, it will be a description of what the hell I intend to do.

I believe that the best Virtual Reality experiences are close to perfect imitations of our expectations of visual and auditory perception, with subtle deviations. These 'subtle' deviations are the magic of VR.

I want to make a game for the Rift. The intended development time is about two years.

I need to make a reality check: It is a one man project and it's a 3D game; it also needs to be fast (the second dev kit for the Oculus has a 75hz screen). One-person projects in 3D usually fail miserably. Not because the code is more complex, but because the scope of the universe is infinitely larger. Also, yes -- bigger scope implies more code, but 3D code isn't much more complex than 2D code, the scope is what makes the codebase explode.

Games are windows to little universes. Game developers are wizards who have the awesome power of creating these universes. The Rift is a new window -- the best yet. Before today all we had was flat screens in front of our eyes. Now we can be present in our virtual universes. (By "now" I of course mean "in the near future").

I want my game to be real, with as little simulation as possible. If I am going to be present in this universe, I don't want to see, let's say, a candle with subsurface scattering, because I know that there aren't photons bouncing around inside the candle and going out in all directions. I don't want to see graphics tricks that simulate this universe. I want to experience a different universe.

You might call this an excuse to avoid doing fancy graphics, and yes, it is a great excuse. The art will be austere almost by necessity, but this doesn't mean it doesn't have to be beautiful.

The game will be a puzzle game involving gravity and the power to expand and compress space. I want to be present in a universe with non-euclidean geometry. If I do my job right, the puzzles should pour out of the universe as I explore the possibilities. This is all fuzzy right now, I am excited to see how the idea solidifies.

This week will consist mostly of doing the groundwork. I have already begun, but I'll save the details for next week.

